# Conflict of Interest: Prescriptions of Psychotropic Medications in San Francisco
Repository for UCSF Mental Health Hackathon 2019 Exploring Conflicts of Interest in Psychotropic Medication Prescription Patterns

## Problem Statement
Pharmaceutical companies invest heavily in marketing. Between 1990 and 2008, pharmaceutical expenditures on marketing increased more than six-fold from $3 billion dollars to $20.5 billion dollars [(Congressional Budget Office, 2009)](https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/111th-congress-2009-2010/reports/12-02-drugpromo_brief.pdf). A large fraction of these dollars are through the form of detailing, in which the drug company provide financial incentives to prescribers in the form of information, free samples, meals, and gifts. In 2010, the Physician Payment and Sunshine Act was passed to increase the financial transparency between prescribers and pharmaceutical manufactures, allowing us to finally know the magnitude of detailing. From 2013 - 2017, pharmaceutical manufacturers made payments worth a total of [$33 Billion to providers](https://openpaymentsdata.cms.gov/summary), with $8.3 Billion coming in 2017.

This becomes a problem when financial conflicts of interest influence prescribers' behaviors that affect real patient lives. For example, a provider may be more likely to prescribe a certain brand name psychotropic drug to a patient if they have received gifts from the pharmaceutical manufacturer even when a cheaper alternative exists, or even worse if the patient may not need the medication at all. The goal of this project is to use San Francisco as a case study and explore the link between financial contributions and prescribing behavior for San Francisco providers. In this project, we will use data science to explore these correlations and relationships. In addition, we will build an application for patients to be able to look up doctors within San Francisco, how often they prescribe certain psychotropic medications, and the contributions they have received from relevant manufacturers. 

